README.md, before:

# Svelte playground

I've been using [React](https://react.dev/) for quite a few projects and I think time has come to learn and deep dive into [Svelte](https://svelte.dev/)... so I'm using this project to do that.

- [References](#references)
- [Steps](#steps)
- [Svelte + TS + Vite (original doc)](#svelte--ts--vite-original-doc)
  - [Recommended IDE Setup](#recommended-ide-setup)
  - [Need an official Svelte framework?](#need-an-official-svelte-framework)
  - [Technical considerations](#technical-considerations)

## References

- [https://svelte.dev/](https://svelte.dev/)
  - [https://svelte.dev/docs/svelte](https://svelte.dev/docs/svelte)
  - [https://svelte.dev/tutorial](https://svelte.dev/tutorial)
  - [https://svelte.dev/playground](https://svelte.dev/playground)
- [https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte)
- [https://vite.dev/](https://vite.dev/)

## Steps

- `pnpm create vite@latest -t svelte-ts svelte-playground` (pnpm 10.13.1)
- `pnpm install`
- `pnpm run dev`

## Svelte + TS + Vite (original doc)

This template should help get you started developing with Svelte and TypeScript in Vite.

### Recommended IDE Setup

[VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) + [Svelte](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=svelte.svelte-vscode).

### Need an official Svelte framework?

Check out [SvelteKit](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit#readme), which is also powered by Vite. Deploy anywhere with its serverless-first approach and adapt to various platforms, with out of the box support for TypeScript, SCSS, and Less, and easily-added support for mdsvex, GraphQL, PostCSS, Tailwind CSS, and more.

### Technical considerations

**Why use this over SvelteKit?**

- It brings its own routing solution which might not be preferable for some users.
- It is first and foremost a framework that just happens to use Vite under the hood, not a Vite app.

This template contains as little as possible to get started with Vite + TypeScript + Svelte, while taking into account the developer experience with regards to HMR and intellisense. It demonstrates capabilities on par with the other `create-vite` templates and is a good starting point for beginners dipping their toes into a Vite + Svelte project.

Should you later need the extended capabilities and extensibility provided by SvelteKit, the template has been structured similarly to SvelteKit so that it is easy to migrate.

**Why `global.d.ts` instead of `compilerOptions.types` inside `jsconfig.json` or `tsconfig.json`?**

Setting `compilerOptions.types` shuts out all other types not explicitly listed in the configuration. Using triple-slash references keeps the default TypeScript setting of accepting type information from the entire workspace, while also adding `svelte` and `vite/client` type information.

**Why include `.vscode/extensions.json`?**

Other templates indirectly recommend extensions via the README, but this file allows VS Code to prompt the user to install the recommended extension upon opening the project.

**Why enable `allowJs` in the TS template?**

While `allowJs: false` would indeed prevent the use of `.js` files in the project, it does not prevent the use of JavaScript syntax in `.svelte` files. In addition, it would force `checkJs: false`, bringing the worst of both worlds: not being able to guarantee the entire codebase is TypeScript, and also having worse typechecking for the existing JavaScript. In addition, there are valid use cases in which a mixed codebase may be relevant.

**Why is HMR not preserving my local component state?**

HMR state preservation comes with a number of gotchas! It has been disabled by default in both `svelte-hmr` and `@sveltejs/vite-plugin-svelte` due to its often surprising behavior. You can read the details [here](https://github.com/rixo/svelte-hmr#svelte-hmr).

If you have state that's important to retain within a component, consider creating an external store which would not be replaced by HMR.

```ts
// store.ts
// An extremely simple external store
import { writable } from 'svelte/store'
export default writable(0)
```

Commit message:

README.md: Runes section created

README.md, after:

# Svelte playground

I've been using [React](https://react.dev/) for quite a few projects and I think time has come to learn and deep dive into [Svelte](https://svelte.dev/)... so I'm using this project to do that.

- [References](#references)
- [Steps](#steps)
- [Runes](#runes)
- [Svelte + TS + Vite (original doc)](#svelte--ts--vite-original-doc)
  - [Recommended IDE Setup](#recommended-ide-setup)
  - [Need an official Svelte framework?](#need-an-official-svelte-framework)
  - [Technical considerations](#technical-considerations)

## References

- [https://svelte.dev/](https://svelte.dev/)
  - [https://svelte.dev/docs/svelte](https://svelte.dev/docs/svelte)
  - [https://svelte.dev/tutorial](https://svelte.dev/tutorial)
  - [https://svelte.dev/playground](https://svelte.dev/playground)
- [https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte)
- [https://vite.dev/](https://vite.dev/)

## Steps

- `pnpm create vite@latest -t svelte-ts svelte-playground` (pnpm 10.13.1)
- `pnpm install`
- `pnpm run dev`

## Runes

[https://svelte.dev/docs/svelte/what-are-runes](https://svelte.dev/docs/svelte/what-are-runes): Runes are symbols that you use in `.svelte` and `.svelte.js` / `.svelte.ts` files to control the Svelte compiler. If you think of Svelte as a language, runes are part of the syntax — they are _keywords_.

Some Svelte runes:

- `$state`: declares reactive state → `let count = $state(0);`
- `$derived`: computed value → `let double = $derived(count * 2);`
- `$effect`: runs when dependencies change → `$effect(() => { console.log(count); });`
- `$props`: component props → `let { name, age } = $props();`

## Svelte + TS + Vite (original doc)

This template should help get you started developing with Svelte and TypeScript in Vite.

### Recommended IDE Setup

[VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) + [Svelte](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=svelte.svelte-vscode).

### Need an official Svelte framework?

Check out [SvelteKit](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit#readme), which is also powered by Vite. Deploy anywhere with its serverless-first approach and adapt to various platforms, with out of the box support for TypeScript, SCSS, and Less, and easily-added support for mdsvex, GraphQL, PostCSS, Tailwind CSS, and more.

### Technical considerations

**Why use this over SvelteKit?**

- It brings its own routing solution which might not be preferable for some users.
- It is first and foremost a framework that just happens to use Vite under the hood, not a Vite app.

This template contains as little as possible to get started with Vite + TypeScript + Svelte, while taking into account the developer experience with regards to HMR and intellisense. It demonstrates capabilities on par with the other `create-vite` templates and is a good starting point for beginners dipping their toes into a Vite + Svelte project.

Should you later need the extended capabilities and extensibility provided by SvelteKit, the template has been structured similarly to SvelteKit so that it is easy to migrate.

**Why `global.d.ts` instead of `compilerOptions.types` inside `jsconfig.json` or `tsconfig.json`?**

Setting `compilerOptions.types` shuts out all other types not explicitly listed in the configuration. Using triple-slash references keeps the default TypeScript setting of accepting type information from the entire workspace, while also adding `svelte` and `vite/client` type information.

**Why include `.vscode/extensions.json`?**

Other templates indirectly recommend extensions via the README, but this file allows VS Code to prompt the user to install the recommended extension upon opening the project.

**Why enable `allowJs` in the TS template?**

While `allowJs: false` would indeed prevent the use of `.js` files in the project, it does not prevent the use of JavaScript syntax in `.svelte` files. In addition, it would force `checkJs: false`, bringing the worst of both worlds: not being able to guarantee the entire codebase is TypeScript, and also having worse typechecking for the existing JavaScript. In addition, there are valid use cases in which a mixed codebase may be relevant.

**Why is HMR not preserving my local component state?**

HMR state preservation comes with a number of gotchas! It has been disabled by default in both `svelte-hmr` and `@sveltejs/vite-plugin-svelte` due to its often surprising behavior. You can read the details [here](https://github.com/rixo/svelte-hmr#svelte-hmr).

If you have state that's important to retain within a component, consider creating an external store which would not be replaced by HMR.

```ts
// store.ts
// An extremely simple external store
import { writable } from 'svelte/store'
export default writable(0)
```
